---
title: Cover Letter
layout: page
---

# Cover Letter

Dear Professor Kennedy and Members of the Search Committee,

I am writing to apply for the position of Instructional Professor in Linguistics and Cognitive Science. I am an ABD Ph.D. candidate in Linguistics at the University of Maryland, holding a certificate in Neuroscience and Cognitive Science. My background combines theoretical morphosyntax and semantics with psycholinguistics and computational modeling and emphasizes the contribution of data from underrepresented languages to cognitive science. I am eager to bring this interdisciplinary perspective to the University of Chicago, where I can contribute to the curriculum in both Linguistics and the Cognitive Science major, while being part of a research community that values theoretical contributions that enlighten many psycholinguistic works.

I am currently a 4th year PhD student at Maryland, with funding secured through 2027, and this is the only position I am applying to this year, because the aims are such a close fit to what I enjoy: helping students and colleagues gain confidence in experimental methods while creating a collaboration opportunity. My preparation for the Instructional Professor role relies on significant experience as a TA for a wide range of courses, teaching many mini-classes within large lectures, designing workshops and mentoring diverse student cohorts. To that end, I have spoken with my advisors, and we agreed that I could potentially graduate early, should the need arise.

As I alluded, I view teaching as a collaboration in inquiry: a process where students are treated as colleagues that push the instructor evaluate their own assumptions and build something clearer. I am prepared to contribute across your curriculum in three primary clusters and collaborate with the existing research landscape in the University of Chicago with the help of elite University of Chicago students. In psycholinguistics and language processing courses, I plan to guide students through the steps of contributing to the field by going over the essential parts of psycholinguistic research. I believe in addition to reading papers, learning how to employ an experiment, modeling the between-the-lines details of established theories, and integrating cross-linguistic data to dissociate confounded factors is essential to learning the field of psycholinguistics. In quantitative methods and modeling courses, I would employ a simulation-based approach that prioritizes statistical intuition over rote formalism, treating models as instruments to explicate verbal psycholinguistics theories of memory, parsing, extra-linguistic elements that come between parser and the grammar rather than ends in themselves. In AI-adjacent courses, I would focus on probing representations within these systems to understand whether they can help us to types practical limitations and be more explicit in other sub-processes in linguistics and cognitive science, treating these models as tools for filling theoretical commitments rather than as ends in themselves. I am also prepared to teach foundational courses in core traditional areas, such as Introduction to Linguistics, Syntax, and Morphology at Boğaziçi University and Maryland.

I strongly believe that students learn the most when classes are accompanied by experiences beyond direct teaching: I have previously developed instructional materials that I view as scholarship of teaching. I have written primers on experimental design, statistical modeling, and computational tools that help students bridge theory and implementation. I initiated a graduate workshop on Bayesian Data Analysis at Maryland's Language Science Center (LSC) and co-organized a sentence production workshop at Oxford. I have mentored both graduate and undergraduate students in implementing research using PCIbex, Montreal Forced Aligner, and R/Stan, effectively bridging the gap between theoretical questions and technical implementation. Being part of LSC and visiting Massyk and UMass helped me understand that intellectual development would not be complete without alumni opportunities of collaboration with faculty. I am excited to bringing this mentality to the UChicago Core, ensuring that even introductory students engage with the field as a discipline where theoretical developments meet cognitive modelling and quantitative research.

The University of Chicago's commitment to this integration makes it an ideal home for my teaching and research, and I am excited by the prospect of contributing to the department's intellectual community and mentoring the next generation of ambitious cognitive scientists. I have enclosed my CV, teaching statement, and sample syllabi.

Sincerely,

Utku Türk Ph.D. Candidate, University of Maryland, College Park
